---
title: 'My Journey: From a Medical Student and Self-Taught Machine Learning Engineer/Researcher to Landing A Research Internship at Carnegie Mellon University'
date: 2020-12-31
permalink: /posts/2020/12/blog-post-4/
---

## A Brief History of Time: My Failed Thought Experiment?

I thought my 2019 was the real rollercoaster until 2020 showed up.

But my journey in A.I has been a rollercoaster right from the beginning; from my first encounter with coursera’s Machine Learning course by professor Andrew Ng of Stanford University in 2016, to the time I wrote my first python code implementing and training a machine learning model. 

The motivation to pursue a career in A.I sprung from my lasting curiosity to understand patterns surrounding human learning and recall mechanisms. I approached this quest from a purely introspective angle. Third year of medical school, I would always attempt to analyse my mental processes and patterns whenever I am in the learning state. I will try to assess different configurations of my learning strategies as a way of assessing my learning progress. 

I would try different learning techniques with the goal of optimizing  for a better understanding and recall. Without access to any external input,books or scientific work, I formulated a 'hypothesis'. I hypothesised that, by varying my speed of reading, what likely keywords to spot next in a sentence based on understanding gathered from previous paragraphs,varying the way I look at text documents at a sentence level,amongst other tweaks,was going to efficiently configure my brain to at least somewhat capture a ‘knowledge graph’. 

The objective of such knowledge graph is efficiency in terms of speed of making connections between concepts  and information retrieval. Anytime I am reading,I kept looping over this thought experiment with the intent of finding inconsistencies sufficient enough to disprove my conjecture. I do understand that this had little to do with the scientific method, but for the least, it provided me a fertile ground to better appreciate later scientific developments such as optimization, attention and memory in the field of  A.I.

## Accidental Machine Learning

So towards the end of 2016, I stumbled upon the term ‘machine learning’ whilst viewing a linkedIn profile of a connection. I had no clue what the term meant,and so I immediately googled it. What  I found was so captivating that I could almost immediately relate it to what I had been thinking and conceptualizing all along. My curiosity to understand machine learning was born on that day.

For weeks, I was hooked onto the Machine Learning course on coursera which is taught by professor Andrew Ng. Unfortunately, I could not afford the paid course, and so I  audited it instead. What that meant is, I did not get full access to the course. Octave was the programming language of choice in this course. It gave me a fair introduction to matrix and vector operations. After auditing the course, I was stuck and remained clueless about how to write code to do machine learning, for a long time. I did not even know that other programming languages were used to do machine learning. 

Although I got stuck on the practical end, one thing kept me excited about machine learning. And that was the gradient descent algorithm. I fell in love with the maths although I had not fully assimilated most of the mathematics content in the course at first. After a few months,I decided to re-audit the course. Then  I dabbled around a bit, learning and polishing my programming fundamentals. After my first peek into python on a friend’s computer, I decided it was something worth learning. So I  chose to learn python mainly because of its elegance and the simplicity in its syntax. What even fueled my curiosity and interest the more was the wide range of use cases for python. I am a maths and physics nerd; And so when I discovered that it could be utilized in building mathematics and physics-based simulations, and also for developing software infrastructures that run engines and robots, I simply  could not believe it.  Imagining that, I just fell in love with the idea of writing code to do all these amazing things.

## Initial Learning Resources

I was already struggling financially in school. Paying for online courses was a luxury for me, partly because I genuinely could not afford. I did not also want to overburden my family, already overstretched by the mere thoughts of paying my medical school fees. So I decided to utilize a lot of free pdf books I got online,as well as Stanford and MIT youtube lectures. I was extremely focused on forming a good theoretical intuition before trying to tackle the practical side of things. I also figured books will do the trick for me because I am an autodidact, and so I  prefer learning under my own guidance from books. Books such as Linear Algebra by Gilbert Strang, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning by Christopher Bishop,the famous CS231n:Convolutional Neural Networks for Visual Recognition from Stanford University amongst a host of other books and resources have been truly instrumental to my journey.

## ‘Talk Is Cheap. Show me the code’ ~ Linus Torvalds

Several weeks had elapsed and I had not figured out a way to get started with writing code to do some machine learning. My programming expertise were just at an intermediate level in python and java. I learnt java because I was interested in android application development. Techniques I found suitable and effective for learning programming involved singling out a programming language of interest, and combining reading books with practicing on sample programming exercises. 

Also youtube videos helped me clear doubts on concepts I was struggling to grasp.I found the road to mastery through self-teaching extremely exhausting. The temptation to simply give up is very high. For my case,I was trying to juggle far too many things simultaneously, and it did not help. So for folks just getting started in programming and machine learning in the self-teaching mode, I encourage you to reach out to experienced programmers and seek their suggestions and recommendations. Seek mentors! They will always have something valuable to share with you. With expert guidance, you will come up with better learning plans to guide you. Better yet: try the online courses. They are really great!  

In summary, if there  is ever a secret to getting really good at programming or anything, I beleive it will be staying consistent in the journey and trusting the process. Do not fear making mistakes or not even getting it at first. What matters is the process, and not the immediate gains. So jump into the ‘learn and  practice’ loop, and let the reasons why you are doing it inspire you forward.

## The Experience

In the process of gaining experience and momentum, I left no stone unturned in sending out applications for internships,job offers,etc. And the result? : I got accepted into a few. Lucky me! For the rejections, I can not count how many rejection emails I received! To technical recruiters, I guess my background was a ‘No No’ to some extent.  Nevertheless, I kept on applying.

There is one thing about learning programming. You can assess your own progress simply by looking at the increasing complexity of tasks you are able to solve with time. As a result,you get drawn to even bigger and exciting technical problems. So,be open to learn more through internships,doing personal projects and by volunteering. A good thing about  working with people is improvement of your ‘people skills’, of which communication is a key component. You will also want to broaden your technical capabilities when you work with experienced software developers and engineers. You may pick up really cool tricks on how to write clean, efficient and high quality code. All this will expose your understanding to appreciate how the tech ecosystem looks like, and how they approach solving client-facing business problems.

## Challenges of a Medical Student in A.I

I met countless challenges whilst attempting to use my limited effort to pursue more than two fields simultaneously. I dabbled around a lot, struggling to strike a balanced mixture out of  medicine and A.I. The amount of uninterrupted attention and conscious dedication one will need to pursue a successful career in medicine is just as enormous as a successful AI researcher and engineer. ‘So how do you combine AI and medicine?’ is a quesiton I get asked the most. The honest answer: I honestly don’t know. I guess any free time I grab out of the world of medical school always feel like a blessing from God! I spend this time across a wide array of activities such as reading AI papers, working on projects, reading maths and AI books, or attending AI conferences when I can.

 Over a year ago, I decided that I was going to focus on mastering my technical skills. I dedicated a lot of time,financial resources and energy to doing more personally-driven projects. As a  consequence(?), I got broke, and burnt out more often than the number of weeks in a month! On several occasions, I will go for more than 2 weeks without food in my stomach. Only water! I did not have any money left for food. I will carry myself with every morsel of energy I could find,walk across the street to attend academic activities and ward rounds. Rather than calling out for help, I silently endured. I am just glad that I did not give up, whatsoever. 
 
 During this space of time, I came up with project ideas, formulated them as machine learning tasks; found datasets; begun implementation; searching resources on stackoverflow and github whenever I get stuck; and reading papers related to projects I was working on. I wrote code, and celebrated when a code *finally* run! Such a relieving feeling.

At the end, if you enumerate all the valuable experiences and lessons learnt from actually writing code, you will marvel. Learning is one thing that compounds over time. So your ability to solve related problems and even figure out completely unrelated and more complex problems will improve significantly. You are able to iterate faster through solutions to problems. You become experienced at figuring things out because you can transfer knowledge across different projects with ease.

## Why You Should Participate in Machine Learning Competitions

Some of the recent major advances in machine learning did not originate from research laboratories and giant tech companies, alone. I have strong believe that ML competitions form a key building  block in advancing ML research and engineering. ML competitions do not seek to simply beautify leaderboards with high scoring submissions. It will amaze you to know that most top scoring solutions translate to steering the machine learning community in really good research and engineering directions. Through competitions, several groundbreaking ideas and techniques were developed and open-sourced for the benefit of the entire machine learning community.

 During the period of COVID-19 lockdown in Ghana, I took the chance to participate in ML competitions across Zindi, Kaggle and HackerEarth. My  focus was on the learning experience, and not the cash prizes. I was interested in working on diverse problems using ML. One nice thing about these competitions is how easy it is to access datasets when you use these platforms. If you are a novice or someone already familiar with ML, I encourage you to participate in  competitions. You may not win any cash prize, but these challenges will help boost your confidence and teach you a lot of cool stuff you will not find in any course or book.

## Summary : To The Great News!

I am excited, honoured, yet humbled to announce that I have accepted a job offer as Research Intern at the Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, USA, starting summer of 2021! I am extremely grateful to my friend and mentor Lucio Dery,for sharing this great opportunity with me, and for constantly supporting me through my lows and my highs! I am extremely grateful to my boss Chelsey Roebuck at Emerging Leaders in Technology and Engineering Inc.(ELiTE), Clayton, Patrick and Ritish for taking their precious time to set up a mock interview for me (after I had only informed Chelsey super impromptu- like two days before actual interview). I am extremely grateful to my family for the support, and to all my friends for their kindness and encouragements.

I am excited about all the challenges ahead of me in 2021!!! I look forward to making the best out of this opportunity, and out of 2021!


*You are your own lab.* 
*Make only what you want to see in your hub,*
*If what you see also benefit others in their labs,*
*Then we preserve a better society, full of genuine smiles and hugs.*

**~Ronny Tuurime Polle.**
